so some of the ideas that I'm going to
be presenting today or mostly ideas are
kind of still in flux and I hope that
you can kind of bear with me and and I'm
gonna be rambling a bit but I think that
there's there's something interesting
here and and I hope that this kind of
invites conversation subsequently and
and I think that bringing various
presentation and Rob's presentation
subsequent to this should elaborate some
of this material too so yeah put the
cover slide I just I selected this image
so Stephen well it's artwork that was
produced in 2008 and he was looking at
the financialization of of London at the
time by doing these kind of ethnographic
studies of individuals that worked in
the financial industry and kind of
looking at relationships you know their
relationships with one another mostly
men and and to kind of society at large
so it's just kind of an important work
for me because he's he's really
examining these these close affiliations
and and like what makes up this culture
and I think that the blockchain
community could also use to do some of
this so for context a little bit about
myself I'm not really gonna be talking
about my work per se but just setting
myself up a bit so I have background in
computational genomics and cell
engineering I work at sloan-kettering
which is a cancer research facility I
also have done a fair bit of work in
molecular simulation and and kind of
statistical modeling and I have a
passion for artists publishing and
curation and I yeah my passion project
is kind of
is yeah I use avant org and this project
ours library cybernetics library as a
venue for organizing and doing artist
projects and then as of recently a well
so throughout the throughout my work
with the magazine we've kind of
addressed technical kind of techno
culture and the politics of technical
culture so that is coming from a kind of
critical lens and I think that set me up
well to start thinking about blockchain
systems which are kind of envelop a lot
of socio technical systems into one
package and so as I recently I've been
doing some independent consulting for
several blockchain organizations kind of
doing some technical design and editing
of their of their like founding
documents which has been quite
interesting moving from the kind of
critical side into the design and
thinking about what these systems could
be and framing them so what I'm going to
be talking about mostly today are crypt
like the metaphors of letter that are
involved in the crypto the crypto space
so there are quite a few of them yeah as
I mentioned that I think one of the the
kind of notable things about the
blockchain industry is that well one it
it seems to be impenetrable for a lot of
people is there's a high learning curve
and so maybe for that reason maybe for
other reasons there's there's a lot of
it tends to produce a lot of metaphors
people map things onto it so I'm just
going to kind of pick a few of those and
discuss them but yeah in terms of you
know what what is a blockchain well is
it's a protocol some markets it's a
network
it kind of looks like accounting kind of
looks like a government kind of looks
like a city or an ecology it looks like
a clock
they look like memes they look like
currencies and then you know the things
that you make with blockchain and smart
contracts the the kind of canonical
metaphor is of a vending machine
that's Nick suppose framing but perhaps
their laws or self executing programs
and then dows which are collections of
smart contracts along with the
individuals that kind of operate those
smart contracts they could be
corporations maybe or communes or
forests in the case of Terror zero or
superorganisms some kind so oh and I'm
going to talk about clocks first because
I think that's kind of just one of the
most interesting ones and then I'm gonna
kind of mostly discuss this ecological
metaphor and now I'm going to talk about
governance a little bit and hopefully
that'll lead into green bears talk of it
okay so proof-of-work is a decentralized
clock this this was I think this is one
of the most helpful metaphors we're
actually understanding what a blockchain
is and I don't think it's it's like
conveyed enough but basically many
people here will already know this but
essentially the the kind of what
proof-of-work will gives us is is a
consensus time more specifically it's a
shared understanding of the order of
events and once you have that you you
kind of get everything else for free out
of that so I I have been collecting
these he's kind of blockchain one
miners like how do you explain the
blockchain like one sentence or one
tweet and I just think it's kind of a
fascinating practice if like trying to
compress such a complex subject into
like a single you know there's a single
sentence and so I have a whole list of
these that there they get pretty
interesting but this is this is my
half-hearted attempt here for Bitcoin
shared ordered record that's published
at a controlled rate it's like trying to
just compress that as much as possible
and also frames frames block chains and
and these kind of crypto systems within
the narrative of publishing which is
something that I'm particularly
interested in so these are like
immutable publications so oh and and
sorry the the image here is the Bitcoin
block generation or it's the basically
the difficulty adjustment of Bitcoin and
how Bitcoin works is every to two
hundred I'm sorry 2016 blocks the
network basically assesses how much work
has been done and then changes the
difficulty automatically so it's a self
regulating system that that ensures that
the the clock rate the publishing rate
is kind of statistically within some
boundaries of it's it's roughly periodic
and just as a to kind of extend the
metaphor to to biological systems
this is the pulse synchronization model
of a Malakai Firefly and this is I
pulled this from a paper where these
individuals are trying to to kind of
refine and make better consensus system
using
fireflies and other biological clocks as
a as a template and just thinking about
the kind of importance of clocks in in
the kind of growth or in biological
systems we see these all the time so you
know all organisms are self-regulating
on on some kind of periodic cycle so
they you know they have some like
homeostatic clock that's internal to to
the organism or internal to a community
so like circadian rhythm your your like
daily cycle in the case of fireflies
these are the you know they have the the
lighting mechanisms that there are the
bioluminescence that they give off they
use that as a kind of tool to
synchronize and and find one another
okay so now I'm going to talk a bit
about yeah the kind of relationship
between energy and money so if we're
going to make this metaphor where and
the we're a biological system looks
something like a blockchain then you
know the the fuel for that is is capital
or some kind of incentive mechanism and
so let's try to kind of equate these
with one another so money kind of by
definition has to be difficult to
produce to vet to prevent counterfeiting
and proof-of-work
basically makes this energy trade-off
explicit by burning energy in order to
create money so that is an interesting
kind of direct relationship you have and
then I kind of wanted to just have us
kind of ponder this this quote from
Harold J Moore
whit's which is from a biology textbook
originally but actually made it into the
inside cover of the last Whole Earth
Catalog in 1971 the flow of energy
through system acts to organize that
system and I think that is very much
frames scientists thinking about
biological systems but but also frames
how capital flows within a capitalist
system
so financial thermodynamics so you'll
actually see a lot so it's just a kind
of anecdotally you'll you'll see a
number of physicists and people who have
worked in thermodynamics like working in
the finance industry because they use
like similar kind of modeling techniques
the actual kind of term of thermo
economics which I'm grabbing here is is
a it's a bit so as as described here
it's a heterodox economics it's it's a
bit of a kind of side discipline but
that thinking actually crosses over
quite a bit and historically there have
been quite a few parallels made between
thermodynamics you know some kind of
like fundamental chemical or physical
you know system of that govern and
governs the kind of mechanics of life
and and economic principles so and I
also just thought this diagram was
really excellent so now you can see the
financial flows and the Centers is kind
of like running everything and you have
solar energy in and then heat out so
this is kind of a self-contained system
that you know that is the earth and
economy and society and everything that
kind of functions within it okay so if
if energy is somehow equated with money
then then now we can talk about
ecologies being equated with markets and
I I just wanted preface this by saying
that this is a really uncomfortable
comparison for me and and the reason for
that is that I think that it enshrines
kind of capital in capitalist systems
within this perceived like natural order
there's there's a it naturalizes in a
way that that we need to be very careful
with however there are resemblances that
we like I think need to be discussed
because our thinking with with one is it
as least informed how we've like
constructed markets and think about
markets and blockchains
our markets so yeah this is just in the
corner here this is 10 seconds of
trading on blackberry it's like a
high-frequency trading
visualization at one point I was doing
some kind of deep dive into the like
time scale of high-frequency trading
which is pretty fascinating ok so I'm
gonna do a little bit of background here
on how one might make this comparison
between markets and Ecology's so
disruption theory for those who are not
familiar with it so the main idea here
is that a product or service begins with
a simple application at the bottom of
the market and then moves up market
digital displace establish competitor
competitors and the idea is that there's
basically this this modulation between a
an interdependent and a modular system
modular system is one that can be pulled
apart kind of composable and it has the
the features described here so
standardized you know it's kind of
optimized for price and speed
and and then typically what happens in
this framework the disruption framework
is that a modular system can can be
overtaken by an interdependent system so
kind of a monolithic framework and one
of the the canonical examples of this is
the the Windows operating system and the
browser specifically so in the case of
the windows ecosystem Microsoft was kind
of exerting control over the entire
operating system and in this case a
module so that that's an interdependent
kind of vertical stack they have
everything and in in this case the
browser became a kind of a modular point
where a modular system could kind of
intervene so code can run in the browser
and what happened was that all of the
applications that anyone that people
started caring about lived in the
browser so it basically abstracted away
the entire computing ecosystem so that
it didn't matter what operating system
you're running it matters what's in the
browser so the idea is that you can you
can kind of work along another dimension
of abstraction that that's just not
accessible to the other system so this
is how these things kind of like flip in
this competitive environment and yeah
just a little background on positive
negative selection like from a you know
putting my like biologists hat on so
there's there's two ways that selective
pressure is kind of modeled in
biological systems and that is positive
and negative selection so positive or
Darwinian selection
is the selective advantage of a
particular trait that become kind of
grows within a system becomes fixed and
negative selection is its opposite where
there's some feature that slowly gets
weaned out of the system and cleared
okay so this is a kind of rough model of
how it biodiversity is kind of
maintained within a biological ecosystem
how you maximize for biodiversity and
this is still like quite theoretical
there's a lot that's not within this
model but I think it's it's a useful
discussion point so basically there's
there's two components there are yeah
competition and evolution are the like
as you're modeling these things with you
know some kind of Asian based system
those are the two factors that you need
in order to maximize biodiversity and
the thinking here is that as one species
forces out its competitors the expansion
of this fit species allows for its
predator populations to rise regulating
the population so yeah as this as this
population of predators grows like yeah
as one organism population grows the
Predators also are able to grow because
there's more food available for them and
then that is a negative feedback loop
that maintains the population size and
then there's a an evolutionary pressure
to evolve away from that so that
increases biodiversity okay so I'm going
to go back in time a little bit and talk
a bit about this
this document which I think is yeah
cyberspace and the American Dream the
Magna Carta for the knowledge age so
basically this was a document that yeah
this is a document that really was came
from some of the kind of countercultural
ideology of that was kind of the melting
pot for Silicon Valley and became a
framework for some of the the regulatory
environment for telecommunications
industry and so I'm just gonna read a
little quote from that I'm sorry this is
a quote from from counterculture
agriculture which is commenting on that
document which is the manifesto the
manifesto that Dyson went on to
co-author extended the cybernetic and
counter cultural analogies current
endings in the social worlds of the
whole earth and wired linked them to
libertarian political agenda and
ultimately used them as symbolic
resources in support of the narrow goal
of deregulating telecommunications
industry cyberspace the author's
explained was more ecosystem than
machine it was a bio electronic
environment that is literally universal
so and then this is a quote from the
manifesto itself if there's to be an
individual policy for the knowledge age
it should focus on removing barriers to
competition and massively deregulating
the fast-growing telecommunications and
computing industries was more it should
allow much greater collaboration between
the cable industry and phone companies
so the argument the Fred Turner makes
and from counterculture to cyber culture
is that basically the framing of this
document focused on the wrong actors so
they're they're kind of
encouraging deregulation and the they
were encouraging companies to play in
this competitive environment but one of
the reasons that I pulled this quote is
that it mentions both competition and
cooperation and one of the things that
I've been really trying to think through
recently is to what extent competition
and cooperation are really part of the
same system and and co-produce one
another and so the idea being like if
you are cooperating with someone then
you're kind of necessarily competing
with others like to what degree is
cooperation kind of localized and I
don't really have kind of a full answer
for that but I would like to believe
that there's something kind of beyond
that that one can transcend that that
cycle but I think it's important to
acknowledge that in in many cases those
kind of co-produce and
reinforce one another also just
digression because I have to you so the
the author Esther Dyson here is the
daughter of Freeman Dyson who's the the
kind of acclaimed physicist I think he
worked on electrodynamics and so you
know Dyson Sphere and I just wanted to
kind of call out the bitcoin Dyson
Sphere here though that's not really
yeah I don't really believe that that's
going to happen but I think it's it's
it's useful to to have a little
conceptual break here okay so where does
this metaphor breakdown between
Ecology's and and markets then this is
an incomplete survey here but just kind
of what I could come with come up with
so first of all physical resources don't
really map one to one in kind of the
market logic that we're that we're
talking about typically
I did mention that you you know in the
Bitcoin network here you're burning
energy in order to create a Bitcoin but
you know money is is he's a conceptual
phenomenon you know it's a social
contract so there there isn't that same
kind of one-to-one you know I have the
resource in hand that and I can trade it
so also yeah the the choices of rep you
know kind of within those representative
frameworks have externalities that we've
kind of unintended and this is really
what happened in the case of this kind
of first wave of decentralization that I
was discussing they were they were
trying to optimize for you know have the
wrong piece of the system by
deregulating it so abstraction is also
just something that that isn't really
you can't really carry out in a kind of
physical system in the same way it's so
the abstractions like off often done
almost you know mostly done through
symbolic manipulation and language it
has you know in a material quality and
that just means that you kind of get
further further removed from the object
of of interest and you know you can kind
of play a lot of games in in the
abstract yep abstract space that you
wouldn't otherwise be able to play in
the physical one and then yeah
aggregation so like because of this
immaterial quality of markets there's
zero marginal cost of resources like you
can create you can essentially print new
money and at the very least you can
print new software and that can create a
feedback loop where the kind of service
with the best quality reinforces itself
and so this is kind of what we see with
platforms like Facebook where or Google
Google's the maybe a better example you
use Google because it has the best
search and then you give them your
information because you're searching
things and that makes the service better
and and so the zero marginal cost of
acquiring new users becomes kind of the
the key piece that like wouldn't
otherwise be possible in a kind of
physicalized environment and then yeah
social values like the eye when
everything is kind of subject to market
logic there's you know there's just
other things beyond that that I care
about that we care about and those need
to be kind of addressed within these
systems so like natural selection is not
something that that I want to apply to
like all of my social relationships
and but by this is what blockchain
networks are do it you know it's like
okay how do we how do we like make
everything into a market and yeah so you
know we're we're like the agents in this
system where the people who who actually
have relationships and want to want to
you know grow those relationships within
these systems and then yeah the the kind
of notion of a historical record is
little is slightly different in a
biological system so like a a genetic
makeup is basically the the results of
these like selection phenomena and
that's yeah there's kind of an implicit
history there rather than this explicit
one in the case of a blockchain but also
in the case of like you know paperwork
and and other systems that that have
current market frameworks run on and so
I this is like really an initial stab at
at some of these differences and I would
really invite all of you to continue
discussing this with me about what these
differences are okay so I'm gonna a
break a little bit and and talk about
governance and representation a bit for
philosophy so first of all I spent a the
first one of the first kind of
blockchain projects that I worked on was
an Oracle and so I did kind of a lot of
research about about how Oracle's work
the theorization of Oracle's within the
blockchain ecosystem which is quite
interesting because it just you know
maps maps well to the kind of scientific
lens and I yeah I think I have a kind of
unusual take on what Oracle's are but
I'll kind of take a stab at it here so
and the reason that I'm bringing this up
is because Oracle's are very much about
representation
so Oracle's make subjective assertions
about the worlds ie representations
that's that is their main function and
in in blockchain space like in within
the blockchain you know within the kind
of smart contract and internal logic
everything is is mechanical it's it's
just completely deterministic this is
like why a smart contract works is
everything it be validated so you can
have a kind of internally consistent
logic within everything you know within
that system what in Oracle does is it
introduces some kind of exogenous
information and that is not trusted per
se so the the main kind of difficulty
with Oracle's is is ensuring that that's
good information so a useful article so
you can just put garbage into the
blockchain and you know that's probably
what most of the blockchain is but kind
of identifying what what good
information is is extremely difficult
and the way that one can do this is that
there's two kind of useful paths here
one is to align subjectivity and
objectivity
so align some kind of assertion about
the world with you know what's
objectively happening in the world and
to do so economically and that can
either be through a centralized Oracle
just by ensuring that the the Oracle you
know wants to maintain its reputation or
by doing it through like a decentralized
system which is extremely difficult
problem but we're not gonna go into that
and then the other is aligning the
subjectivity of two different parties
and so this would be yeah an Oracle that
that basically produces you know good
opinions or
that I trust and yeah one of the reasons
that I bring this up is that in my kind
of reading of this identity is an Oracle
problem because it is saying it is make
an assertion about an individual that I
am a certain person and I am who I say I
am and doing that in a secure and true
sense ok so the right so I'm gonna
actually go back a little bit to the
whole earth which is I'm a kind of like
a huge whole earth catalogue nerd so it
kind of makes its way into a lot of my
talks but this is something that I've
been kind of concerned about for a
little while so the the kind of max on
the whole earth catalogue is access to
tools which I think resonates with me
and and a lot of people but you you can
kind of see a the kind of libertarian
ideology like fallout of this if you
like push that idea so access to tools
becomes kind of this self-sufficient
behavior becomes this like liberal
individual ideology and and that's not
really where I want to be going you know
the there's I think there's a difference
between having yeah having the ability
to kind of kind of sustain yourself and
and do something and and I think this
this is also kind of addressed by by
Ruth the other day it this is the the
DIY versus do it with others kind of
comparison here I would much change much
more interested in doing things with
others for the most part so yeah but the
this kind of logic of you are you're you
are the only kind of trusted Authority
is kind of baked into a lot of these
systems so this is David CIAM the one of
the kind of OG cypherpunks talking this
is kind of the earliest indication that
I could find of some of this language so
he's talking about an untraceable
electronic mail system in 1981
so the solution presented here can be
compromised
only by subversion or conspiracy of all
of a set of authorities ideally each
partition our participant is an
authority so you're your own self
sovereign person and I guess just before
we move out yeah the one of the the
reason that I'm bringing this up is that
in most blockchain systems a key is kind
of the the key feature so key maps to an
individual and that makes very explicit
the the voting power or the or the kind
of monetary power or you know it defines
an individual as the the kind of most
important unit of this system and I kind
of wonder how much room that leaves for
more collective action so yeah a little
bit on designing decentralized systems
so you I'm sure everyone will be
familiar with this code but
organizations which design them
organizations which design systems are
constrained to produce designs which are
copies of the communication structures
of those organizations and I yeah I've
just been thinking about this recently
in the context of new new block chains
being built and you know new layers on
those blockchain on existing block
chains being built
because all of this is is kind of so new
I think everyone is still figuring out
what what's going on and how to do this
and I'm not entirely sure that that
metaphors map exactly but recently
there's been some discussion of you know
the extent to which this kind of maps on
to urban planning you know can this is
Shangri which is Corbusier's City which
is kind of famously like you know
absolutely gorgeous but like the the
unhappiest city in the world and I think
that there is definitely a lot of this
going on and the construction or growth
of decentralized systems it definitely
exists somewhere between like a top-down
and a bottom-up behavior and yeah just
as a kind of case study or interesting
example have how these things are kind
of mapping onto biological systems or
environmental systems as Definity x' so
did ya Definity x' a governance system
which they haven't announced too many
details about but basically they have a
what they call like a blockchain it's
like a brain or something like an
artificial intelligence they're calling
it but it's basically a directed graph
of delegated follow relationships and
then you can you can basically like an
instantiate a basically you you can you
can kind of follow those relationships
and then this will converge on on a
single decision which is an interesting
yeah I mean I've been very interested to
see how that plays out and obviously
there's a lot of kind of contention
around the extent to which we can
actually like design on chain governance
systems but and another
is this kind of speculative Avalanche
program a protocol which uses a similar
like epidemic model where basically you
look at the peers around you and what
they're saying and then you gossip out
what that you know what that a assertion
is and then that just propagates out
through the network so this looks a lot
like like some kind of viral epidemic or
or kind of like a nucleating event
within some kind of biophysical system
and yeah the governance problem yeah we
just I don't think we know what the
basic unit of governance is in a
blockchain system yet we're still kind
of figuring that out and and the
relationship between kind of endogenous
and exogenous governance and and the
competition between different chains is
going to be very interesting to see how
that plays out
but it does look very much like an
ecosystem you know having multiple
chains and Inter chain protocols and and
yeah just contracts that kind of
interoperate between different
environments and then yeah I guess I
want to leave you guys with the the kind
of question as to whether the the
choices of representative systems that
we're making are you know are really the
best ones and those are you know keys
for individuals and multi SIG's or dows
for communities those kind of mix so
explicit the relationships in that
network that you know we may not be
leaving room for some of the the kind of
softer like governance and social
dynamics that are that are really at
play yeah and then these are some of the
issues that one runs into with
governance and nobody identity
reputation these are all extry
difficult problems or you know
incorporating any of these into a
governance system kind of only creates
more problems and then detecting
collusion or coercive behavior is
extremely difficult you know once you
introduce an Adobe or or you could have
someone coercing someone else
particularly with reputation systems and
yet incentivizes consensus networks are
absolutely still susceptible to
consolidation of power
we just haven't really seen seeing that
play out yet but there will be kind of a
contraction and consolidation I mean
Bitcoin mining I think is a good example
but what we'll see we'll see many more
I'm sure yeah so this is my last slide
but I think that there's a lot of
enthusiasm around law chains and crypto
in general but it's kind of a lot of
enthusiasm from everyone so like
anarchists capitalist socialists
authoritarians like all of these people
are looking at crypto and and why are
they doing that like it it offers some
alternative to a status quo that that
that I think we all kind of palpably
feel is broken in some way and there's
just kind of wildly speculative claims
about that both fuel of the industry and
you know capturing the imagination of of
new developers and artists and everyone
but yet I think that kind of also
becomes a yeah that that'll will
eventually become self-defeating in some
way so you know those claims won't be
lived up to but we'll see you know we'll
see some emergence of you know kind of
functional systems that come out of it
but we should kind of acknowledge that
these claims are kind of absolutely
grand in a way that can't be lived up to
you
and then yeah I mean there's it's what
blockchain is like one of the only
viable utopias around I think that
people are really looking for narratives
that that they can kind of grab on to
and and push forward so I think the it's
kind of our responsibility the people in
this room to help shape those narratives
and yeah I invite you guys to to kind of
discuss that and come talk to me and I
hope that you know the presentations
after this also evoke some of these
utopias or at least discuss them in a
way that that's productive so thanks
[Applause]